# Work-It-Out Backend

This is the Backend for my dream Gym Workout Tracking app. 
I've tried many and none seemed to have all of the parts I wanted, so I made my own. 
Here, lifters can create custom exercises, build & run their own workout templates, and view records & charts of their progress for each exercise they've completed. 
Great for tracking one's gym progress and to help keep that gym discipline going!

The app is intended for mobile screens, but everything is possible on a full-sized computer as well.

Here is a [live version](https://workitoutapp-hraketdwbte4fpbs.westus2-01.azurewebsites.net/) of the app
(note that it is deployed on low-cost Azure tiers, so the DB "wakeup time" might take a bit).

# How It's Made

Tech used: ASP.NET Core, Azure, Dapper, SQL Server

This backend was created to support the [Work-It-Out Frontend]("https://github.com/erikbenton/WorkoutFrontend)
in a Backend For Frontend (BFF) configuration.
The backend uses an ASP.NET Core Web API that hosts the frontend as a "fallback" endpoint (as opposed to an API endpoint).

The Web API stores and retrieves data from a SQL Server database, which is done using the Dapper ORM library.
Dapper was chosen due to its lightweight nature, built-in protection against SQL injection attacks, and because I, the main developer, wanted to write more of the actual SQL myself than have it be generated by Entity Framework.
EF is great, but a goal of this project was to write more SQL for actual application uses and Dapper is perfect for a good balance.

This is all hosted on Azure services and deployed via GitHub Actions.
The GitHub Actions workflow copies the latest frontend artifact from its "main" branch into the wwwroot folder for hosting.
The backend is then built and deployed to an Azure Web App and Azure SQL Database.

# For the Future

- Add Users (Authorization & Authentication)
  - WIP, see Identity Provider setup here (https://github.com/erikbenton/BentonIdentity)
- Add Programs: a collection/set of workouts
- Create "time" and "distance" exercise sets rather than just weight eg: running, biking.

# Lessons Learned

* Azure Services: Learning how to navigate Azure and deploy + maintain a project on my own was the major "skill goal" for this project.
* ASP.NET Core: Refreshing myself on the pipeline and how to configure middleware to help streamline Controllers.
* Project Structure: A big highlight of this work was how much smoother development could go by breaking down the different database communication layers into: Services, Repositories, and Data Access.
* Dapper: Great lightweight tool for communicating with a SQL database that I really wanted to get more experience with after seeing its use in a few other projects.
* SQL Server: Creating a database, its tables, all of the queries, etc. from scratch was a major goal. I wanted to write all of it myself (minus some help from Dapper for parameterization and object mapping).
  * Implementing the correct Foreign Key ON DELETE statement consistently can be tricky.
* Project Management: Using a Jira kanban board to keep track of features to implement, to view progress over time, and to organize repo branches.


# Acknowledgements

Thanks to [ZapSplat](https://www.zapsplat.com/) for allowing me to use their "bell small hand short ring" sound to notify the lifter when their Rest Time is up.